diagram option:
(old)

 hh ─
 dr ┌
 dl ┐
 ur └
 ul ┘

 HH ━
 DR ┏
 LD ┓
 UR ┗
 UL ┛

 vv │
 VV ┃

 hV ╂

 Hv ┿


 ───┓ ┌──────┓ ┌──────┓ ┌──────┓ ┌───
 ───╂─┘┌─────╂─┘┌─────╂─┘┌─────╂─┘┌──
 ───╂──┘┌────╂──┘┌────╂──┘┌────╂──┘┌─
    ┗───┘    ┗───┘    ┗───┘    ┗───┘ 



   ┏──┐
  ┌╂─━┿┓
  │┃  ││
  ││  ┃│
  │└──╂┘
  └───┛


On a proof for extracting subknots:
One of the key parts of my algorithm is the excision of self-contained
subknots, which are then analyzed seperately.  Maybe this has already been
proven to be a valid technique, but I'm not aware of it (granted, I haven't
done a lot of research into papers that might address it).

My approach is rare in maths, a physical demonstration leaving the mathmatical
soundness of it for someone else.

Take a length of string and form it into a specific formation.  In my thought
versions of this I've used a pair of trefoils of opposite chirility, in
sequence together.  Then join the ends to make it a closed loop.  Once the
ends are joined the essential topology of the knot is fixed and cannot be
changed, though the apparent topology of it can change a great deal.

Take a length of pipe-cleaner and weave it through the openings of one of the
trefoils, then pull the string tight around the pipe-cleaner.  The purpose of
the pipe-cleaner is to make it easier to loosen the trefoil later.

The first thing to prove is that it's trivial to move a strand of the string
in the larger trefoil over the entirety of the smaller trefoil.  This is not
one of the fundamental Reidemeister moves.  While it could be decompsed into a
sequence of them, doing so is unnecessary.  We have just proven that this is
valid.

Building on that validity, it is easy to demonstrate physically that one can
manipulate the string so that the tight trefoil is at any desired point within
the larger trefoil, including at any desired point within a set of extraneous
crossings created in the larger trefoil.

In particular, if one makes a simple twist (Reidemeister Type 1), translates
the smaller trefoil to be on the loop created by that twist, and then loosens
the smaller trefoil to be equal size, then one is left with an apparent
topology in which it appears that the crossing created by the twist is
essential to the knot.

Reversing this process demonstrates why it is valuable for analysis to excise
self-contained subknots.


A further demonstration involves three or four trefoils in sequence on a
string.  By using the method of tightening the knots and translation along the
string it can be demonstrated that these trefoils can be rearranged as desired
in to any ordering sequence whatsoever.  This proves communicability of
excised subknots, which may be useful later.


Alternatively, both demonstrations could be made using a string with four
knots, two trefoils (3₁) and two figure eights (4₁).


This string may also be useful to provide visual examples of later analysis to
determine how to simplify knots.
